from the Library of Congress in
Washington DC
please join me in welcoming him this
afternoon to speak about the Emperor of
all maladies dr. mukajee
thank you so much for that warm
introduction the plague began in one
house we don't know very much about what
that house was we don't know very much
about even its first victims but by the
time it became the plague as we know it
we know something began to happen that
changed the trajectory of that illness
the plague began to become not just a
mechanism by which we understand the
human body or illness but in fact a
mechanism by which we understand culture
and civilization and history of that
time the influenza epidemic of 1918
which swept around the world again began
in one house somewhere and had its
patient zero we don't know her name we
don't know his name we can surmise some
names from that and yet again something
mysterious begins to happen in around
the middle of 1918 influence it doesn't
remain influenza it becomes a mechanism
by which we understand the culture of
1918 it becomes a mechanism by which we
view the world illness has a capacity to
do that it affects human beings directly
it begins in one home in one body it
occurs in one home in one body and then
it becomes something quite different it
becomes a mechanism by which we see the
whole world and that brings me to cancer
the Scottish writer Gil Elliott whose
work I particularly admire a writer of
the water historian of the war once
asked us to perform a thought experiment
I'd like everyone in this audience to
help me with this thought experiment is
well and the experiment is the following
he said imagine for a second a world a
nation that was made up of all the
victims of war in human history every
person who had every man woman and child
who had died during any war in human
history now we know a little bit about
the size and the shape and the the
contours of this nation it has about a
billion men and women in it we know that
the nation grew dramatically in the 90
14 for instance grew dramatically again
in the 1930s and 1940s and what's
interesting is that many of us know
members or citizens as it were of this
nation our grandparents might have been
citizens of this nation perhaps some of
our parents were now the thought
experiment that occurred to me that
began to occur to me as I began to write
the book this book was imagine a
nationhood of cancer imagine much like
Gil Elliott asks us to imagine imagine a
nationhood in which every past present
and future patient with cancer everyone
who had ever died of cancer came
together to form a nation what would the
contours of that nation would be like
what would sighs be like who would who
would be its citizens what's amazing to
me is I can actually visualize even as I
sit here and talk to you I can visualize
the citizens that I know in that
nationhood I it's almost as if I can
have a conversation with them so I'd
like you for a second to imagine this
nationhood in this year alone about
seven million people were added to this
nation it has exceeded Gil Elliott's
nation of 1 billion by several
magnitudes over and will do so in the
future in a way that is surprising even
to people whose lives have been directly
touched by cancer and and here's what's
important to me about that nationhood is
that we talked about degrees of
separation here's a nationhood where we
have no degrees of separation this is
our nation one in two men one and three
women will be diagnosed with cancer in
the United States one in four of us will
die of cancer in the United States so
this becomes not someone else's problem
it becomes our problem and so in writing
this history I began to visualize it not
as someone else's history but as our
history as my history and that animates
much of this book now to me the question
that i started off early on in in
writing the book was how does one put
together then a story of this nation
dude as it were when its citizenship
so enormous when its friends and spreads
so many different boundaries how does
one put together narrative ly speaking
as a writer how does one put it together
and perhaps the crucial insight I had in
all of this was one that stayed with me
right through the book which is you can
only tell very big stories by telling
very small stories and so I tried to
stick with this right through so the
entirety of the book my book can be
imagined and I like to imagine it as a
series of individual stories that are
strung together and are pieced together
and in fact again speaking to an
audience of readers and writers what was
most tricky about writing the book was
not the content but the way they
stitched together the book entirely
lives in it seems as it were if you take
the seams away the entire book would
fall apart but of course in my case the
seam the stitching was very obvious
because I was writing continuously about
the same entity the same nationhood as
it were and looking at it over and over
again from different angles much like
blind men and women looking at the
elephant so let me begin by telling you
one of these stories I'm going to read
two or three sections from the book and
then talk about the book in questions
and answers but let me begin by talking
about the seminal story that begins the
book and that is the story of Sidney
Farber Sidney Farber was a pathologist
Dr of the Dead as they were called
because his job was to diagnose diseases
not generally not to treat them in the
1940s Sidney Farber became particularly
interested in a variant of cancer which
was uniformly lethal again think of this
for a second this was acute
lymphoblastic leukemia and it was an
illness that carried a 100 percent
mortality it was a disease that
typically affected young children and
every child we brought home to the
hospital and as one medical magazine
importantly noted would be diagnosed
discussed transfused and then sent him
to die every child faro became
interested in is partly because he was
interested in hematology the study of
blood but he was also interested because
unlike many other forms of cancer
leukemia which is a
cancer of the blood cells cancer white
blood cells could not be surgically
removed you can't go to a surgeon and
say take my leukemia away because by its
very nature its present all over the
body and so far we began to wonder where
there were medicines that would
specifically attack these cancer cells
in the body spare normal cells and
thereby allow him to create a
chemotherapy of course even the word
didn't exist now he was helped signifer
was helped in his quest by an
indian-born chemist who's name was yell
up regard a subaru subaru had come from
chennai from madras to india from india
to travel to Boston to the School of
Tropical health where he studied
tropical health but anyone who's been to
Boston knows there's nothing tropical
about Boston yell I didn't know this he
suffered through two or three winters
and he eventually found himself a job as
a urinal cleaner he cleaned urinals at
the Brigham and Women's Hospital and
then through a series of connections
worked himself up until he was
performing what he eventually would call
autopsies on cells much like a
pathologist would perform an autopsy
subaru began to open up cells and ask
the question of what lives inside them
and in doing so he began to discover
these molecules of life these various
bio chemicals that we find very familiar
today but suber are discovered them
unfortunately this was a time when it
was unquestionable that he would not get
tenure at Harvard and so he went up to a
pharmaceutical company called laterally
up north in New York where he began to
synthesize some of these biochemical
molecule these molecules of life from
scratch and during this process he
stumbled upon an anti vitamin and anti
folic acid molecule and he began to
synthesize this in vast quantities now
shoot back to Sidney Farber in Boston
his be Farber had figured out using
other people's work that in fact such a
medicine such an anti folic acid reagent
would be valuable in treating cancer and
so Sidney Farber wrote to yella who he
knew from his time at Harvard and he
began to inject children with
lymphoblastic leukemia with this
medicine and he documented the four
emissions these emissions would last for
about six weeks seven weeks and then the
Leukemia would fiercely come back and
the children would die again and that
was it that was the bad as the beginning
of the story and for me the quest in
writing my book began to become well how
does one then find the story behind this
thing that I knew about from journal
articles how does one uncover the first
patient I talked about the first patient
with the plague the first patient of
influenza who was Sidney Farber's first
patient and I began began to look around
i searched quite widely for this young
boy I knew it was a young boy I only
knew his initials it was RS he could
have been Roberto Salinas Richard
Salisbury any name I was in Boston then
and I thought well the child died but
somehow some relative must live close by
so I began to send out emails i became
became a fan of these genealogy websites
i would post on genealogy websites and
ask the question do you know any child
who died in 1948 with luca velocity
leukemia was treated by sidney farber
but there was no response absolutely
nothing so I became dejected and I
thought I would take a vacation and so
I've traveled to my parents house in
India and someone said to me it was in
the middle of my vacation was the winter
of 2006 and someone said to me you know
that Indian chemist who had discovered
these anti folates someone said well
this chemist had essentially one major
biographer who lived a few blocks away
from my parents house so one winter
evening in 2006 having nothing else to
do I said well maybe I'll go over and
travel to this man's house and have a
conversation with him not expecting to
have a conversation with him about
anything else aside from these anti
folic acid derivatives and so I spoke
for an hour you know it was a wintry
evening in Delhi the insects were
buzzing outside and the sunset and it
was very quiet and I said well it's time
to go home and then as I was leaving he
said you know i had been to sidney
farber's clinic in the 1960s and i have
a record of these patients that Farber
was treating would I like this so
so here was 6,000 miles away from Boston
and I was handed a picture of a child
whose name was RS and a twin a child and
his twin RS and es from 1948 a clipping
from a that he had kept this man had
kept and I found out that the child's
name was Robert Sandler that was RS and
having then traveled 6,000 miles I went
back to Boston and in 15 minutes away
from where I was doing all my work I
could then go to this Charles house and
look outside through the windows as if
through the eyes of a child who had gone
two gone so he is in some ways our
ancestor an iconic figure in our history
who had vanished and one last month
moment you know 11 become went when you
when you write you always want to figure
out something about that moment about
being there about reporting from that
site I came back from That visit to
Robert Sandler's house and I had my own
daughter was three years old when I came
back home and she said well what did you
do and I said I went to visit this
child's house the child is no longer
there and she said well where does he
live and I opened a map and I showed her
where he lived and he and she said I was
curious to find out well if I were
looking through a three-year-old eyes
what would I remember about where he
lived and she looked at it if she looked
around and I said to her that she lived
across from a zoo and instantly she was
animated so the idea that if you were
treated or child and you lived across
from the zoo the only thing you would
remember were the ostriches or the
Tigers was something had found its way
into my book and the only way that found
its way into my book was again
remembering to look through the eyes of
a three-year-old child at what the world
would look like it wouldn't look like
hospitals it wouldn't look like the big
buildings of Boston it would look like
the ostrich's and tigers the story has a
little epilogue and the epilogue is
perhaps more more more amazing truth
being stranger than fiction the epilogue
is that about a week after my book was
pretend
after the book was published I got a
phone call in my office it was my editor
and she said you know you need to sit
down I was writing a grant or something
and she said you need to sit down
because this is an important phone call
and it was the twin brother on the phone
he had walked into a bookstore never
having read about my book never having
known in my book and my book is
dedicated to robert sandler and to those
who came before and after him and he
opened the book and found his own twins
name and then he threw an amazing series
of coincidences found a mechanism to
contact me and then talk to me about my
book so i often say to myself that you
know there are so many different ways in
which my book has come from one circle
to another circle the whole process of
writing for me has been circular i never
seem to move forward history keeps to
seems to come up pull me back like a
like a tide let me read then two
sections from the book which i think are
interesting important i dip I tried to
read different sections in different
places partly because it reminds me
about what I wrote much of which I've
now begin to forget this is this is the
story of robert sanders descendants as
it were and by that i mean i told you
about acute lymphoblastic leukemia being
a hundred percent fatal in 1945 1948
well Sidney Farber opened a peculiar
door as if through a latch by adding
this one medicine that Farber had worked
on by adding more medicines by the 1960s
these remissions had been lengthened out
two weeks and then months and by 1968
about sixty to seventy percent of
children with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia were being cured completely
cured so this was a disease that was
uniformly fatal in 1950 had Robert
Sandler been born 18 years later we can
surmise that he would likely have lived
out the same lifespan as his twin but he
was born as it were too early so this is
a therefore the part I'm going to read
is now my attempt to find not Robert
Sandler
but the iconic survivor then of
lymphoblastic leukemia the first cohort
of patients who now began to live
without dying of this disease and that
too it's interesting story I i was
looking again for this to me this iconic
figure again I couldn't find her anyway
I asked a man in women the physicians in
Boston and around the world actually to
recall back to their very first cohort
of patients and they had some news but
they never fully had and none of these
channels eventually worked out and I was
looking one day on the web and by this
time I become so programmed to know
exactly I could tell you by what date
you were treated what regimen what
variation of chemotherapy you have
received it was like a mental algorithm
that I had and one day I was looking
through the web and I found a woman who
had look posted on the website saying
you know I was treated in 1964 and I
knew instantly from looking at her
exactly exactly was almost like her old
medical history could have been written
out in front of my eyes because I was so
immersed in this story so this is me
then contacting her and finding her but
the story of leukemia the story of
cancer isn't the story of doctors who
struggle and survive moving from one
institution to another is the story of
patients who struggle and survive moving
from one embankment of illness or
another resilience inventiveness and
survivorship qualities ascribed to great
physicians are reflective qualities
emanating first from those who struggle
with illness and only then mirrored by
those who treat them if the history of
medicine is told through the stories of
doctors it is because their
contributions stand in place of the more
substantive heroism of their patients I
said that all the children had relapsed
and died but this is not quite true a
few a small handful for mysterious
reasons never relapse with leukemia at
the National Cancer Institute and a few
other hospitals brave enough to drive
vamp the regimen was called vamp of all
peculiar names about 5% of the few
children finished a year-long journey
they remained in a mission not just for
weeks or months but for years they came
back we are
career and sat nervously in the waiting
rooms at trial centers all around the
nation their voices deepened their hair
grew back biopsy after biopsy was
performed on the bone marrow but there
was no sign of cancer on a summer
afternoon I drove through western Maine
to the small town of waterboro against
the foggy overcast sky the landscape was
spectacular with ancient pine and birch
forests dipping into crystalline lakes
on the far edge of town I turned onto a
dirt road leading away from the water at
the end of the road surrounded by deep
pine forest was a tiny clapboard house a
56 year old woman in a blue t-shirt
answered the door it had taken me 17
months and innumerable phone calls
interviews questions and references to
track her down one afternoon scouring
the internet I found a lead I remember
dialing the number excited beyond words
and waiting for the interminable rings
before a woman answered I'd fixed up an
appointment to meet her that we can
driven rather recklessly to Maine to
keep it when I arrived I realized i was
20 minutes early the basement was
flooded and the couch was growing mildew
so we SAT outdoors in the shadow of the
tent shadow the trees in a screen tent
with deer flies and mosquitoes buzzing
outside so here I was all prepared to do
this big interview this woman take
photographs except I couldn't go into
the house because everything was flooded
so we had to sit outside the woman Ella
I I'll call her Ella had collected a
pile of medical records and photographs
for me to look through and actually
handed them over I sense the shiver
running through her body as we even
today 45 years later the memory haunts
her viscerally gala was diagnosed with
leukemia in june nineteen sixty four
about 18 months after vamp was first
used at the National Cancer Institute
she was 11 years old and the photographs
taken before her diagnosis she is a
typical preteen with bangs and braces in
the photograph taken just months after
she is transformed bald sheet white from
anemia and severely underweight
collapsed on a wheelchair ella was
treated with ramp her oncologist in
Boston having heard of the spectacular
responses at the NCI had rather bravely
chosen to treat her off trial with this
for drug regimen it seemed like a
cataclysm
the high dose of vincristine vincristine
is the V in the vamp had caused such
severe collateral nerve damage that she
was left with a permanent burning
sensation in her legs and four fingers
prednisone that's the pee in vamp made
her delirious the nurses unable to deal
with with a strong-willed deranged
preteen wandering through the corridors
of the hospital screaming at night
restrained her by tying her arms with
ropes to the bedposts confined to her
bed she often crouched in fetal position
her muscles wasting away her neuropathy
worsening at 12 years of age she became
addicted to morphine which was
prescribed for her pain and then she
detoxed herself by sheer force of will
by as she put it lasting it out through
the spa's spasms of withdrawal and yet
remarkably the main thing she remembers
is the feeling of being spared I feel as
if I slip through she told me arranging
the records back in her envelopes she
looked away as if to swat an imaginary
fly and I could see her eyes welling up
with tears she had met several other
children with leukemia in the hospital
wards none had survived I don't know why
I deserved the illness in the first
place but then I don't know why I
deserve to be cured leukemia is like
that it mystifies you it changes your
life my mind briefly flashed back to the
cheer abaya mummy to tosa to Halstead's
young woman awaiting her mastectomy
sidney farber never met ella but he
encountered patients just like her
long-term survivors of vamp in 1964 the
year that ella began her chemotherapy he
brought a set of photographs of a few
such patients to Washington as a sort of
show-and-tell for Congress living proof
that medicines could cure cancer the pot
was becoming increasingly clear to him
cancer research needed an additional
thrust more money more research more
publicity and a directed trajectory
towards a cure his testimony before
Congress thus acquired a nearly
devotional Messianic fervor after the
photographs in his testimony as one
observer record any further proof was
anticlimactic and unnecessary barbara
was now ready to leap out from the realm
of leukemia into the vastly more common
real cancers we're attempting to develop
chemicals that might affect otherwise
incurable
of the breast the ovary the uterus the
lung the kidney intestine and the highly
malignant tumors of the skin such as the
black cancer or melanoma he wrote the
cure of even one such solid cancer in
adults fiber new would singularly
revolutionize oncology it would provide
the most concrete proof that this was a
winnable war we read one last section
from the book
this is a section right at the end when
I talk about the future and I use again
to come back to guild Elliot I use the
idea of a thought experiment which is to
take something and carry it forward
through time to figure out what might
happen in the distant future and as a
kind of index case I chose what might be
really the very first case that's
described in the book and that is the
case of Queen atossa Queen Atossa was a
Persian Queen we think she had breast
cancer she is just a kind of side note
in Herodotus histories but a very
peculiar an important side note because
it turns out that atossa discovers that
she has a lump in her breast as
Herodotus puts it and then somehow
poignant lee reminiscent lee for our
times she goes into hiding her first
reaction is shame and she hides her
breast and ultimately it's there's a
Greek slave she was a Persian queen she
had a Greek slave named demo CDs who
ultimately excises he allows him to
excise her malignant breast whether it
whether it's a tumor well it was and
also we don't know where the word
doesn't exist and her auditor spends
only three lines in the history is
talking about this case but it turns out
this case actually is the entire
histories pivots on this little tree
line sentence because once Atossa has
been revived she lives as far as we know
demas cities the Greek slave begs her to
allow him to go back to Greece and the
only way she the slave can be returned
back to Greece is if the Persian king
will conquer Greece and therefore bring
the entire kingdom degrees as it were
and so Atossa Herodotus tells us pleads
with her husband to turn the face of the
Persian War away from its eastern
Francesca via towards the Greek front
and that of course originates the early
history of the West that the switch in
the face of Persian the switch in the
face of the greco-persian war which
follows really switches and n turns the
axe
of the world and so amazingly even
though Herodotus dedicates three lines
or four lines in the histories it's a
pivot this single case is the pivot on
which to some extent the histories turns
so I go back to her as a kind of index
case and talk about her and walk her
through time so I'm going to read this
last passage to walk her through time
and give you a sense of the sweep of
what we covered to some extent in the
book recall at assa the Persian queen
who likely had breast cancer in 500 BC
and now imagine her traveling through
time appearing and reappearing in one
age after another she is cancerous
Dorian Gray as she moves through the arc
of history her tumor frozen and stage
and behavior remains the same at Ross's
case allows us to recapitulate past
advances in cancer therapy and to
consider its distant future how has a
treatment and prognosis shifted in the
last 4,000 years and what happens to
tosa in the new millennium first pitch
her back in time to Imhotep clinic in
Egypt in 2500 BC Imhotep has a name for
her illness a hieroglyph that we cannot
pronounce this is the very first time we
encounter cancer as any medical illness
he provides a diagnosis and then he
writes there is no treatment closing the
case in 500 BC in her own court across
herself prescribes the most primitive
version of a mastectomy which is
performed by her Greek slave 200 years
later in trois Hippocrates identifies
her tumor as Garkinos does giving her
illness a name that will ring through
its future Galen in 1 68 AD hypothesized
that Universal caused a systemic
overdose of black bile as he puts it
trapped melancholia boiling out as a
tumor a thousand years flash why we're
moving through time mitosis entrap black
bile is purged from her body if the
tumor keeps growing relapsing invading
and metastasizing medieval surgeons
understand little about at ross's
disease but they chisel away at her
cancer with knives and scalpels some
offer frogs Bloods lead plates goat dung
holy water crab paste caustic chemicals
as treatments when a trustee reemerges
in the 19th century she encounters a new
world of surgery in Halstead's baltimore
clinic this is William Halstead the
great surgeon in 1898 haces breast
cancer is treated with the boldest and
most
affinity of therapy thus far radical
mastectomy with a large excision of the
tumor and removal of the deep chest
muscles and lymph nodes under her armpit
and her collarbone in the 1970s new
therapeutic strategies emerged akasa
surgery is followed by adjuvant
combination chemotherapy to diminish the
chance of relapse a tumor tests positive
for the estrogen receptor and so
tamoxifen the anti-estrogen is added to
prevent a relapse in 1986 her tumor is
further discovered to be her to
amplified in addition to surgery
radiation adjuvant chemotherapy
tamoxifen she is now treated with
targeted therapy with the new drug men
called Herceptin it's impossible to
enumerate the precise impact of these
interventions on a choice of survival
because the shifting landscape of trials
doesn't allow a direct comparison
between her fate and 500 BC for instance
and her fate in 1989 but surgery
chemotherapy radiation hormone therapy
and targeted therapy have added likely
anywhere between 17 and 30 years to her
survival diagnosed at 40 say she can be
reasonably expected to celebrate her
60th birthday in the mid 1990s the
management of a ptosis breast cancer
takes another turn her diagnosis at an
early age and her ancestry raised the
question of whether she carries a
mutation brca1 or brca2 and so her
genome is sequence and indeed a mutation
is found she enters an intensive
screening program to detect the
appearance of a tumor now in an
unaffected breast and now her two
daughters are also tested found positive
for brca1 they're offered either
intensive screening or a prophylactic
bilateral mastectomy or even tamoxifen
to prevent the development of breast
cancer for tossers daughters the impact
of screening and prophylaxis might be
too dramatic a breast MRI might identify
a small lump in one daughter it might be
found to be breast cancer and it
surgically removed in its early pre
invasive stage the other daughter might
choose to undergo the prophylactic
bilateral mastectomy excising her
breasts preemptively so that she can
live out her life free of breast cancer
mover toss into the future now in 2050
she will arrive at her breast oncologist
clinic with a thumb-sized flash drive
containing the entire sequence of her
cancers genome identifying every
mutation in every gene
an algorithm might identify the pathways
that are contributing to the growth and
survival of her cancer and therapies
will be treated targeted against these
pathways to prevent a relapse of tumor
after surgery she will begin one
cocktail of drugs expect to switch to a
second one when her cancer mutates and
becomes resistant and switch again when
her cancer mutates and becomes resistant
again she will likely take some form of
medicine whether to prevent to cure or
to palliate her illness for the rest of
her life this indubitably is progress
but before we become too dazzled by a
trois of survival it's worthwhile
putting it into perspective give it to
us a metastatic pancreatic cancer in 500
BC and a prognosis is unlikely to have
changed by a few months over 2500 years
if a casa develops gall bladder cancer
that's not a manner biggest surgery or
survival changes only marginally over
the centuries give a toss of CML this
kind of leukemia hodgkin's disease and
her lifespan might have increased by 30
40 or even 50 years part of the
unpredictability about the trajectory of
cancer in the future is that we don't
even know the biological basis for this
heterogeneity we cannot fathom for
instance what makes pancreatic cancer or
gallbladder cancer so different from
particular variants of leukemia or
tosses breast cancer what is certain
however is that even the knowledge of
this biology is unlikely to eradicate
cancer fully from our lives and our
bodies as Richard dole suggests and as a
tosser that epitomizes we might as well
focus on prolonging life rather than
eliminating death this war on cancer
might best be one if this is what me
what we mean by winning by redefining
victory itself I'll stop here and I
welcome any questions
yes sir recently there was an article in
The Washington Post which raised some
questions about testing for cancers
after a certain age I just wonder if you
had any opinions on that subject so it
depends on the kind of cancer I'll give
you a give you a very horny example
that's come up recently and will come up
in our lives which is after a very very
long time a massive trial was performed
which ask the question where they're
smokers heavy smokers with a long
history of smoking should be screened
with CT scans cat-scans to detect early
tumors and therefore eliminate them from
their bodies now you might think this is
logical and in fact this is what the
trial try to prove and in fact if you do
this in the appropriate setting you
actually save lives heavy smokers
scanned by cat-scans you can take this
tumors away and you save lives now
here's a question your grandfather
smoked seven packs a day for 20 years
and quick 10 years ago should he be
screened you smoked as a child or as an
adult let's say an adolescent from 14
years to 17 years quit stopped again and
then started again should you be
screened now what happens as a result of
this kind of paradigm is that every time
you run a screening trial the there's a
slippery slope and you begin to slip
down that slope and it's a very
complicated one because every time your
screen you're getting radiation and
radiation comes with costs so it tells
you how complicated it is even to run
the simplest trial the most logical
thing you know people at cat scans are
good at detecting small tumors you're a
smoker 0hi setup for having a small
tumor maybe we can take it out this
simple question became and is going to
become literally a billion dollar
question if we took it to its logical
limits it would bust Medicare because
you know how many people would you
screen for how many cancers so it's a
reminder to us that we have to take
these screening trials very very
carefully and to figure out what
right population who should be be
screening how much training should be
offered offered and went to the
screening stall and we just know just a
little bit of you know a little bit
about mammograms and and breast cancer
mean a little bit about cats cancer lung
cancer the rest of it is completely
unknown I haven't read the book yet and
maybe the book answers this question but
since you've studied the history of
cancer I have always thought that we
actually have a lot more cancer now
because we've polluted our air our water
and pretty much our entire food supply
is there more cancer now or was it just
hidden and not talked about so the
answer is there is more cancer now than
ever before the predominant reason
driving that is as far as we can tell
the overall aging of the population that
is that what's driving the right of the
rise in cancer incidence and prevalence
is in fact the overall aging of the
population now if there are pollutants
in the food in the water in the air
they're certainly contributing but that
contribution is overwhelmed by the
driver I call cancer a disease that only
emerges in the double negative when all
the other killers are killed so that's
what's driving the incidence make no
mistake however to assume that cancer is
a disease that is in that is only in the
old age if we just took if we just took
young people by young I mean this is the
changing standard by young I mean anyone
under 60 who's dying of cancer in the
United States you still have hundreds of
thousands of men and women hundreds of
thousands of men women the total being
600,000 if you take all comers but still
hundreds of thousands of men and women
so that's what's driving the incidence
yes sir my question was right to that
point what are the statistics on the
age-adjusted incidence for all the
cancers because some physicians have
said we have got some alarming increases
in childhood cancers and we ought to be
looking I mean it's a course vitally
important to find cures I have one
relative who's needs to be cured
head cancer but he said the the scary
thing is that we're getting too many and
we ought to be looking at root causes on
those what's your what's your answer to
that so a couple of important points and
and again go through them in the book
but we have to these are very crucial
points the age-adjusted incidence of
cancer is a very complicated thing and
the reason is as we've become better and
better in diagnosing cancer the
age-adjusted incidence will rise only
because we become becoming better at
diagnosing it so for instance they
adjusted incidence of prostate cancer
has grown up dramatically after the PSA
test the age-adjusted incidence of
breast cancer has gone up dramatically
after mammography and that's because
we're becoming better and better
diagnosing them so what you really want
to ask is what is the age-adjusted
mortality how is that changing and the
answer is that in fact it's been
decreasing and has been decreasing for
the past about 10 adios it increased
dramatically in the 1980s and 1990s
because of the long shadow of cigarette
smoking particularly in women the men
the peak already had occurred the women
the peak and women came later and so
that you know drove it up during the 80s
and and about for the last 10 all yours
it's been declining mortality has been
declining now that is not only because
of prevention of smoking treatment and
screening have both played a role in it
so it is it is absolutely true that the
decline has been present for about a
decade or so yes sir hi I'm as I
understand it there's a general rule
that eighty percent of physical health
issues have a behavioral health
component there's a psychiatrist
psychologist who the 30 years looked at
that really in the context of family
dynamics and stress leading to cancers
he's got a firm unity disease which i
canti can't explain right now but do you
see incidences of that that stress from
any source especially family dynamics
can increase though the probability of
cancers I'm very resistant to this idea
myself for several reasons and I I've
gotten myself into enormous trouble for
saying this but I think it's correct I
think there is a cancer especially
the idea of blaming the victim is a very
old idea particularly women's cancers
and the N and to say to someone the
reason you have cancer is because you
were stressed or depressed essentially
reinvents to me the medieval idea of
blaming the victim the woman with breast
cancer already has enough on her plate
you know she doesn't need to be told
that the reason she got cancer was
because she was stressed or depressed we
actually studied this somewhat it would
be useful to have a whiff of evidence
such as populations where there's a huge
amount of systemic stress having higher
rates of cancer they would be useful to
have a whiff of evidence from for
instance large registries of that follow
people with depression really chronic
depression and that evidence has just
not been convincing it has not been
convincing now it's absolutely true that
your psyche your mental state has very
much to do with the process by which you
heal but everyone's process is different
I know as many people with the the most
positive spirits who have died of cancer
and I know many many people who have had
the most negative attitude and who still
survive so oh very pulmonary yes sir
looking at say biliary cancer stage for
the liver and kidneys do you believe
that chemotherapy has the best chance of
at least prolonging life with gene
therapy come into play or is it too late
for that and alternatives such as
vitamins without getting too much an
accident or herbals like a tumeric and
other things how much can that come into
play to at least prolonging if not
curing such an illness well you know you
talked a little bit about alternative
medicine I mean in general I think
intelligent chemists and scientists have
to be agnostic about alternative
medicine all our medicines were
alternative until they became
traditional our pharmacopoeia comes from
plants primarily still today that said
has there been an enormous has they had
there been enormous discoveries in
cancer medicine in treatment that have
come from the so-called alternative
medicine world
I'm not sure I'm not convinced yet my
only plea to every community whether it
be traditional alternative medicine is
that we have to have the same metrics
otherwise our language begins to
degenerate we need to have a language
that's common and that is we know how to
run trials we know how to judge metrics
and so my plea is let's bring all of
those now in particular to gall bladder
cancers you know this has been a
struggle for I would say decades now and
really nothing significant has work we
need a completely different way of
thinking about delivering medicines to
gall bladder and pancreatic cancer and
you wouldn't be surprised that you know
you go outside there is a pancreatic
cancer is lies at the very front of all
investigations that from the National
Cancer Institute right up to every
single advocacy organization is saying
let's make an example let's turn
pancreatic cancer around but thus far
not very much has worked surgery and
liver and kidneys liver and kidney yes
similarly yep thank you sir thank you
I'm a science writer for pnas to my
question is really about your writing
process yeah so in some ways your book
is this epidemiological journey and it's
a very long one and you talked about a
long one yes and you talked about how
the book lives in it seems so I'm
curious about whether you drew
inspiration from other books to sort of
build this now do ya so I can talk about
my my sort of antecedents my exceedance
are there many but I let me talk about a
couple they're important richard roche
making of the atomic bomb was an
important antecedent to my book if you
haven't read it i think it's an amazing
history I was also particularly inspired
by by a series of books but Rachel
Carson's book the way Rachel Carson's
book came into an sort of question that
must have been on everyone else's mind
but somehow no one was asking it you
know how does the environment to affect
our bodies how does it how is it
affecting how does our intervention
affect nature and it was a game changer
you know you didn't speak about the
environment in the same way before and
after Rachel Carson's book so so those
were some of my sort of heroes my
antecedents more contemporary ones
include Michael Pollan's book which I
was very intrigued by and then there
were a whole series of books that also
live
as I say in their scenes and a series of
essays Susan Sontag's illnesses metaphor
another and you see that threaded
through the whole book yes when you read
so much about how cancer impacts
patients psychologically you know
through the diagnosis as well as in
their survivorship with distress and
despair why is it that we're not
spending more time and money towards the
psychological aspects of cancer I wish
we were just to give you an outlay of
what's happening and this is our this is
your job this is what we need to do the
there are going to be global cuts across
the National Cancer Institute budget
this year let me give you a sense of
numbers and we'll finish with this maybe
well let me give you a sense of numbers
the NCI budget this year was five
billion dollars the amount of money that
was spent in the Middle Eastern wars in
the last few years was three trillion
dollars that is 16 hundred of the NCI
budget for every one dollar we gave to
the NCI we gave six hundred foot six
hundred dollars into this war there will
be six hundred thousand deaths of cancer
this year alone so absolutely we would
be spending more money across the board
to the psychological to the psychiatric
rehabilitation to new trials to new
medicines and the total amount of money
budgeted in Congress is five billion
dollars so it seems to me that there's a
disproportionality there but you tell me
this has been a presentation of the
Library of Congress visit us at loc.gov